#summary Documentation for User Material Subroutines (UMATs).
#sidebar TOC

= Introduction =

NAG Ltd have provided funding to develop an interface for user materials. Once implemented, this will expand the range of material types available for use with ParaFEM. The funding is provided by NAG Ltd on behalf of EPSRC as part of HECToR's distributed computational engineering and science support mechanism (HECToR dCSE). For convenience, we have adopted the UMAT interface defined by Abaqus. For further details, please see the following [http://www.parafem.org.uk/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=42:microstructurally-faithful-modelling-of-materials&catid=22:materials-science&Itemid=57 project entry] on the [http://www.parafem.org.uk main ParaFEM website].


= Abaqus UMAT Interface =

The arguments to the Abaqus subroutine are as follows:

{{{
 SUBROUTINE UMAT(STRESS,STATEV,DDSDDE,SSE,SPD,SCD,
1 RPL,DDSDDT,DRPLDE,DRPLDT,
2 STRAN,DSTRAN,TIME,DTIME,TEMP,DTEMP,PREDEF,DPRED,CMNAME,
3 NDI,NSHR,NTENS,NSTATV,PROPS,NPROPS,COORDS,DROT,PNEWDT,
4 CELENT,DFGRD0,DFGRD1,NOEL,NPT,LAYER,KSPT,KSTEP,KINC)
}}}

||*Variable Name*||*S&G Equivalent*||*Type*||*Meaning*||
||{{{STRESS}}}||{{{sigma}}}||Real array||Stress terms||
||{{{STATEV}}}||{{{-}}}||-||-||
||{{{DDSDDE}}}||{{{dee}}}||Real array||Stress-strain matrix||
||{{{SSE}}}||{{{-}}}||-||-||
||{{{SPD}}}||{{{-}}}||-||-||
||{{{SCD}}}||{{{-}}}||-||-||
||{{{RPL}}}||{{{-}}}||-||-||

== Variables to be defined ==
=== In all situations ===

{{{
DDSDDE(NTENS,NTENS)
}}}

Jacobian matrix of the constitutive model. DDSDDE(I,J) defines the change in the Ith stress component at the end of the time increment caused by an infinitesimal perturbation of the Jth component of the strain increment array.

{{{
STRESS(NTENS)
}}}

This array is passed in as the stress tensor at the beginning of the increment and must be updated in this routine to be the stress tensor at the end of the increment. If you specified initial stresses, this array will contain the initial stresses at the start of the analysis. The size of this array depends on the value of NTENS as defined below. In finite-strain problems the stress tensor has already been rotated to account for rigid body motion in the increment before UMAT is called, so that only the corotational part of the stress integration should be done in UMAT. The measure of stress used is _true_ (Cauchy) stress.

{{{
STATEV(NSTATV)
}}}

An array containing the solution-dependent state variables. These are passed in as the values at the beginning of the increment unless they are updated in user subroutines {{{USDFLD}}} or {{{UEXPAN}}}, in which case the updated values are passed in. In all cases {{{STATEV}}} must be returned as the values at the end of the increment. 

In finite-strain problems any vector-valued or tensor-valued state variables must be rotated to account for rigid body motion of the material, in addition to any update in the values associated with constitutive behavior. The rotation increment matrix, DROT, is provided for this purpose.

{{{
SSE, SPD, SCD
}}}

Specific elastic strain energy, plastic dissipation, and _creep_ dissipation, respectively. These are passed in as the values at the start of the increment and should be updated to the corresponding specific energy values at the end of the increment. They have no effect on the solution, except that they are used for energy output.

=== Only in a fully coupled thermal-stress analysis ===

{{{
RPL
}}}

Volumetric heat generation per unit time at the end of the increment caused by mechanical working of the material.

{{{
DDSDDT(NTENS)
}}}

Variation of the stress increments with respect to the temperature.

{{{
DRPLDE(NTENS)
}}}

Variation of {{{RPL}}} with respect to the strain increments.

{{{
DRPLDT
}}}

Variation of {{{RPL}}} with respect to the temperature.

=== Variable that can be updated ===

{{{
PNEWDT
}}}

Ratio of suggested new time increment to the time increment being used ({{{DTIME}}}, see discussion later in this section). This variable allows you to provide input to the automatic time incrementation algorithms in Abaqus/Standard (if automatic time incrementation is chosen). 

{{{PNEWDT}}} is set to a large value before each call to {{{UMAT}}}.

If {{{PNEWDT}}} is redefined to be less than 1.0, Abaqus/Standard must abandon the time increment and attempt it again with a smaller time increment. The suggested new time increment provided to the automatic time integration algorithms is {{{PNEWDT}}}?{{{DTIME}}}, where the {{{PNEWDT}}} used is the minimum value for all calls to user subroutines that allow redefinition of {{{PNEWDT}}} for this iteration.

If {{{PNEWDT}}} is given a value that is greater than 1.0 for all calls to user subroutines for this iteration and the increment converges in this iteration, Abaqus/Standard may increase the time increment. The suggested new time increment provided to the automatic time integration algorithms is {{{PNEWDT}}} ? {{{DTIME}}}, where the {{{PNEWDT}}} used is the minimum value for all calls to user subroutines for this iteration.

If automatic time incrementation is not selected in the analysis procedure, values of {{{PNEWDT}}} that are greater than 1.0 will be ignored and values of {{{PNEWDT}}} that are less than 1.0 will cause the job to terminate.

=== Variables passed in for information ===

{{{
STRAN(NTENS)
}}}

An array containing the total strains at the beginning of the increment. If thermal expansion is included in the same material definition, the strains passed into UMAT are the mechanical strains only (that is, the thermal strains computed based upon the thermal expansion coefficient have been subtracted from the total strains). These strains are available for output as the _elastic_ strains.

In finite-strain problems the strain components have been rotated to account for rigid body motion in the increment before {{{UMAT}}} is called and are approximations to logarithmic strain.

{{{
DSTRAN(NTENS)
}}}

Array of strain increments. If thermal expansion is included in the same material definition, these are the mechanical strain increments (the total strain increments minus the thermal strain increments).

{{{
TIME(1)
}}}

Value of step time at the beginning of the current increment.

{{{
TIME(2)
}}}

Value of total time at the beginning of the current increment.

{{{
DTIME
}}}

Time increment.

{{{
TEMP
}}}

Temperature at the start of the increment.

{{{
DTEMP
}}}

Increment of temperature.

{{{
PREDEF
}}}

Array of interpolated values of predefined field variables at this point at the start of the increment, based on the values read in at the nodes.

{{{
DPRED
}}}

Array of increments of predefined field variables.

{{{
CMNAME
}}}

User-defined material name, left justified. Some internal material models are given names starting with the _ABQ__ character string. To avoid conflict, you should not use _ABQ__ as the leading string for {{{CMNAME}}}.

{{{
NDI
}}}

Number of direct stress components at this point.

{{{
NSHR
}}}

Number of engineering shear stress components at this point.

{{{
NTENS
}}}

Size of the stress or strain component array (NDI + NSHR).

{{{
NSTATV
}}}

Number of solution-dependent state variables that are associated with this material type.

{{{
PROPS(NPROPS)
}}}

User-specified array of material constants associated with this user material.

{{{
NPROPS
}}}

User-defined number of material constants associated with this user material.

{{{
COORDS
}}}

An array containing the coordinates of this point. These are the current coordinates if geometric nonlinearity is accounted for during the step; otherwise, the array contains the original coordinates of the point.

{{{
DROT(3,3)
}}}

Rotation increment matrix. This matrix represents the increment of rigid body rotation of the basis system in which the components of stress {{{STRESS}}} and strain {{{STRAN}}} are stored. It is provided so that vector- or tensor-valued state variables can be rotated appropriately in this subroutine: stress and strain components are already rotated by this amount before {{{UMAT}}} is called. This matrix is passed in as a unit matrix for small-displacement analysis and for large-displacement analysis if the basis system for the material point rotates with the material (as in a shell element or when a local orientation is used).

{{{
CELENT
}}}

Characteristic element length, which is a typical length of a line across an element for a first-order element; it is half of the same typical length for a second-order element. For beams and trusses it is a characteristic length along the element axis. For membranes and shells it is a characteristic length in the reference surface. For axisymmetric elements it is a characteristic length in the plane only. For cohesive elements it is equal to the constitutive thickness.

{{{
DFGRD0(3,3)
}}}

Array containing the deformation gradient at the beginning of the increment. 

{{{
DFGRD1(3,3)
}}}

Array containing the deformation gradient at the end of the increment. This array is set to the identity matrix if nonlinear geometric effects are not included in the step definition associated with this increment.

{{{
NOEL
}}}

Element number.

{{{
NPT
}}}

Integration point number.

{{{
LAYER
}}}

Layer number (for composite shells and layered solids).

{{{
KSPT
}}}

Section point number within the current layer.

{{{
KSTEP
}}}

Step number.

{{{
KINC
}}}

Increment number.